Prem Pal Singh Rawat (born 10 December 1957), formerly known as Maharaji, is an Indian international speaker and author. His teachings include a meditation practice he calls "Knowledge",[1] and peace education based on the discovery of personal resources such as inner strength, choice, appreciation and hope.[2]

Prem Rawat is the youngest son of Hans Ram Singh Rawat, an Indian guru and the founder of the Divya Sandesh Parishad, later known as Divine Light Mission (DLM). After his father's death, eight-year-old Prem Rawat assumed his role. At 13, he traveled to the West and took up residence in the United States. When young adults took interest in his message, the movement grew by tens of thousands. Many in the news media were perplexed by his youth and claims of divine status; he was also criticized for a lack of intellectual content in his public discourses,[3][4] and for leading an opulent lifestyle.[5][6]

Prem Rawat's marriage at the age of 16 to a non-Indian severed his relationship with his mother. At that point, the Indian branch of DLM controlled by his mother split from DLM everywhere else; at that point it was established in 55 countries. In the early 1980s, he began to discard references to religion in his speeches and closed the ashrams. The name of the DLM was changed to Elan Vital. Since that time, Prem Rawat has continued to travel extensively, speaking about peace to large and select audiences worldwide. On several occasions he has received recognition for his work and message of peace[citation needed].

In 2001 he established The Prem Rawat Foundation (TPRF) to support his work and humanitarian efforts. Its Peace Education Program is licensed and utilized by correctional facilities and other service organizations around the world.

History
1957-1970
Further information: Hans Ji Maharaj

Prem Rawat in traditional mourning clothes, speaking after the death of his father in July 1966
Prem Pāl Singh Rawat was born in Haridwar, Uttarakhand in northern India, on 10 December 1957, the fourth and youngest son of guru Hans Rām Singh Rawat and his second wife, Jagat Janani Mata Shri Rajeshwari Devi. Prem Rawat attended St. Joseph's Academy elementary school in his hometown of Dehra Dun.[7] At the age of four, he began speaking at his father's meetings, and at six his father taught him the "techniques of Knowledge." His father died in 1966, and during the customary 13 days of mourning, his mother and senior officials of the organization discussed the succession. Both his mother, Mata Ji, and eldest brother, Satpal Singh Rawat (known then as Bal Bhagwan Ji, and currently as Satpal Maharaj), were suggested as successors. Before either could be nominated, however, Prem Rawat addressed the crowd of mourners, reminding them that their master was immortal and still among them.[7] In response, his mother, brother and senior disciples accepted Prem Rawat as their Satguru, bowed to his feet and received his blessing.[7] Previously known to his father's followers as Sant Ji, Prem Rawat now assumed the title "Guru Maharaj Ji" and was called "Balyogeshwar" by others (roughly "born saint" or "born lord of Yogis") on account of his youth and spiritual precocity.[7][8][9][10] From that time, Prem Rawat spent his weekends and school holidays traveling as his father had, addressing audiences on the subject of Knowledge and inner peace. Because of his youth, effective control of the DLM was shared by the whole family.[3][11]

During the 1960s, Westerners in India searching for spiritual guidance met DLM members, and some became initiates or premies (from the Hindi prem, meaning "love".) British initiates invited him to visit the West, and in 1969 he sent a Mahatma, a close Indian student, to London on his behalf.[12] In 1970, many of his new Western followers flew to India to see him. They were present at India Gate, Delhi, when, still only twelve years old, he delivered an address known as the "Peace Bomb," which marked the start of his international work.[13][14]


Arriving in the US, Prem Rawat at Los Angeles Airport
1971–1975
In 1971, Prem Rawat traveled to the West against his mother's wishes.[15][16] His first western address was given in June 1971 at Glastonbury Fayre.[17] Author Ron Geaves theorises that "the convergence of Prem Rawat, formerly known as Guru Maharaj Ji, and Glastonbury Fayre in 1971 was a key event in understanding the jigsaw that came to be known as 'New Age' spirituality."[18]

He then went to Los Angeles, New York, Washington, Canada and South Africa. His arrival in the United States was met with some ridicule, as the teen-aged Rawat was seen as too immature to be a religious leader.[3][19] However, he generated great interest among young adults, who were willing to examine his claimed ability to give a direct experience of God.[3] Many were attracted by the sense of joy, peace and commitment shown by Prem Rawat's followers.[20] One witness said that Prem Rawat "played the whole time he was there ... he played with squirt guns, flashed pictures of himself for all to see, and took movies of everybody ... Love flowed back and forth between him and his devotees."[21] Enthusiastic new members spread the message that the 13-year-old Prem Rawat could reveal God.[22] He returned to India later that year with 300 westerners, stayed in the mission's ashrams.[12]
